# How Draghi Steers the New European Commission

In early September, the impressive report "[The Future of European
Competitiveness](https://commission.europa.eu/topics/strengthening-european-competitiveness/eu-competitiveness-looking-ahead_en)"
by former ECB President and Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi was
published. His general analysis -- the EU economy's innovation capacity
and productivity development are increasingly lagging behind the US and
China -- was received as a wake-up call. His main recommendations --
such as the need for €800 billion in additional investments and a new,
coordinated industrial policy -- made headlines in all member states.
The alarming report was handed over to Ursula von der Leyen, the current
President of the European Commission (EC), who is running for her second
term until 2029. The content of Draghi's report is interesting, but more
important for its expected policy impact is that Von der Leyen
explicitly instructed her [new team of
Commissioners](https://commission.europa.eu/about-european-commission/towards-new-commission-2024-2029/commissioners-designate-2024-2029_en)
to boost European competitiveness a week later.

## Three New Portfolios within the EC

"Draghi" is prominently featured in her mission letters for the next
five years to the Commissioners. There are three new portfolios for the
Executive Vice Presidents, clearly inspired by his ideas. Ribera
Rodríquez becomes Executive Vice President for "Clean, Fair, and
Competitive Transition"; Henna Virkkunen for "Tech Sovereignty,
Security, and Democracy"; and Stéphane Séjourne for "Prosperity and
Industrial Strategy". While the focus of the EC 2019-2024 was on being
ready for the digital age, an economy that works for people, and
achieving the Green Deal and a climate-neutral continent, the priorities
for 2024-2029 shift to clean tech, competitiveness, sovereignty,
security, and industrial policy.

## Far-reaching Proposals for a New Economy

What can we expect from the new European Commission? Reading the mission
letters, we can anticipate several far-reaching proposals.

The EC wants to pursue a more active industrial policy, partly in
response to the Inflation Reduction Act in the US, which attracts
European companies with funds and tax benefits, and the rapidly emerging
conquest of the European market by Chinese companies receiving state
aid. They want a Clean Industrial Deal with adjustments to EU state aid
rules, allowing for more public support to accelerate the energy
transition, decarbonize industry, and ensure sufficient production
capacity for clean tech. A specific task is to lower energy prices in
the EU for businesses, as electricity prices are currently 2 to 3 times
higher than in the US and gas prices 4 to 5 times higher. This price
difference is mainly due to Europe's scarcer natural resources, but also
due to fundamental shortcomings in the joint energy market, such as
poorly connected energy infrastructure between member states, different
and conflicting national policy regimes, and very limited cross-border
competition between energy companies.

Additionally, the EC will review competition policy for horizontal
mergers -- read: merging (inter)national competitors -- because there is
a geopolitical need for European companies to operate on a larger scale,
have more investment power and willingness, and thus act more
resiliently, efficiently, and innovatively on the world stage. Draghi
calls these the European champions necessary to compete with American
and Asian giants. Besides this relaxation of competition policy, the EC
wants to strengthen other parts to better support European companies in
scaling up within the EU and beyond, and to more powerfully protect
promising, innovative startups and scaleups against killer acquisitions.
This is a policy shift: EU competition rules will gain new power-forming
and protective functions.

The EC also wants to establish a European Competitiveness Fund (ECF) [by
bundling existing
funds](https://sciencebusiness.net/fp10/commission-prepares-bundle-all-research-and-innovation-money-competitiveness-fund?utm_source=ActiveCampaign&utm_medium=email&utm_content=Commission%20prepares%20to%20bundle%20all%20research%20and%20innovation%20money%20into%20competitiveness%20fund&utm_campaign=Science%7CBusiness%20Bulletin%20No%20%201229),
to quickly organize financing for Important Projects of Common Interest
(IPCEIs) for the most strategic sectors and technologies, helped by the
relaxed state aid rules. The EU needs to scale up and protect these
projects faster in the geopolitical struggle with the US and China.
European public procurement rules will also be adjusted to ensure a
certain supply of vital technologies, products, and services, and to
ensure that European production in strategic sectors and technologies
continues. Besides this strategic support for domestic businesses in the
internal market, the Commission will more forcefully and compellingly
apply the Foreign Subsidies Regulation (FSR). The FSR, which came into
force last year, gives the EC the ability to tackle internal market
distortions caused by foreign subsidies to companies, for example by
forcing subsidized assets to be sold or giving competitors access to
subsidized infrastructure. This should ensure a level playing field with
foreign companies in the European internal market, in line with the EC's
proposal earlier this month [for higher tariffs on Chinese electric
cars](https://nos.nl/artikel/2539575-eu-landen-stemmen-in-met-heffing-op-chinese-elektrische-auto-s).

## New, Coordinated European Industrial Strategy for Innovation

This upcoming EC wants to lead the EU into a modern innovation era with
a new, coordinated industrial strategy. The core of this: member states
must invest more, coordinate, and innovate, and more actively and
powerfully use the opportunities of the joint internal market and
external economic policy. This shift was also seen in the [Letta
report](https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/ny3j24sm/much-more-than-a-market-report-by-enrico-letta.pdf)
on the future of the internal market: the belief is that guaranteeing
the four classical freedoms of persons, goods, services, and capital is
no longer sufficient. On Draghi's recommendation, the Commission wants
to develop a Competitiveness Coordination Tool through which member
states will coordinate investment and policy choices, focusing on clean
tech, decarbonization, and incentivizing investment. Brussels also wants
to conclude an Industrial Decarbonisation Accelerator Act to create
leading markets in the development, production, and adoption of clean
tech in industry, with accelerated permitting procedures. Additionally,
the competitiveness of the defense industry will be targeted, with
improvements to the internal market, stimulation of innovation, and
increased coordinated public and private investments. The EC will work
on a European Defence Union.

## Extra Focus on Digital Innovation in the EU

Digital innovation rightly receives much attention and extra policy
focus. The EC will look at how digital technologies and AI opportunities
can be better utilized, which is essential for increasing productivity
in the EU. Brussels wants AI startups and industries to have access to
supercomputing capacity and, together with member states, industry, and
social partners, will develop an Apply AI Strategy to improve the use of
AI in industry and public services. The functioning of the (future)
internal European digital market -- like the energy market -- must also
be significantly improved to increase competitiveness. The Commission is
therefore aiming for a Digital Networks Act, a European Data Union
Strategy, and an EU Cloud Policy: rules and regulations to harmonize,
simplify, and connect. Finally, European cybersecurity standards must be
raised and harmonized.

As the EU currently lags significantly behind the US in big tech, the EC
primarily wants to increase activities and investments in "emerging"
technologies such as supercomputing, semiconductors (chips), the
Internet of Things, genomics, quantum computing, and space tech. Here,
larger opportunities seem to exist to lead the way in the future,
provided they are coordinated. For example, Brussels is now stimulating
the development of eight large quantum computers, paying half the costs,
[with one to be located in Amsterdam at the national supercomputer
Snellius](https://www.universiteitleiden.nl/nieuws/2024/10/nieuwste-quantumcomputer-komt-in-nederland).
For chips, they will analyze where the strategic segments, innovation
potential, and material production opportunities lie, and there will be
an EU long-term plan for quantum chips. The Commission wants to focus on
future technologies, their economic value, and greater strategic
autonomy: much attention will therefore be given to reducing
dependencies on critical raw materials and materials from non-EU
countries. Hence, an EU Critical Raw Materials Platform will be
established. The new EC also wants to launch a Circular Economy Act to
create market demand for secondary raw materials and organize a single
internal European market for waste, which is also necessary to start
reusing critical raw materials and materials.

## Europe Will Be Built Through Crises

It is so clear how Draghi is steering the new European Commission, at
the request of Von der Leyen. The Commissioners seem set to come up with
far-reaching proposals on clean tech, competitiveness, sovereignty,
security, and industrial policy over the next five years.

A point of attention for the Netherlands is that we have more of a
growing high-tech industry -- think of companies like ASML, NXP, or VDL,
which make specialized production tools that play increasingly important
roles in international value chains -- than a green tech industry.
Indeed, also to produce green tech, but not exclusively. However, the
expanding Dutch high-tech industry has similar problems to the green
tech industry that Draghi focuses on, namely that the raw materials for
production also predominantly come from China, creating dependencies and
vulnerabilities.

The main omission in the mission letters is: how do we get the money?
That €800 billion in additional investments will not come solely from
the market. While Draghi clearly expresses his support for structural
joint debt issuance by EU member states to finance part of the necessary
public investments in innovation and infrastructure and strengthen the
European capital markets union, this politically sensitive idea
understandably does not return. Ultimately, member states will still
have to repay joint debt issuance, and national political support for
this remains limited. For the Netherlands, it is true that we are
sufficiently creditworthy to attract capital ourselves to achieve the
goal of investing 3% of GDP in R&D -- if we really wanted to.
Additionally, we have several private investors such as venture capital,
banks, insurers, and pension funds, but they invest only sparingly in
the Netherlands itself. There is still policy gain to be made here.
Lagging investments are also simply a result of low return expectations,
partly because entrepreneurship, valorization, and productivity
improvement in the EU and the Netherlands received relatively less
attention (or still do) compared to regulating the qualitative effects
of innovation or its application. At the European and national levels,
there is still room for solutions here.

A major uncertainty is, of course, to what extent Germany and France
follow the analysis in the report "The Future of European
Competitiveness" and -- above all -- to what extent they will support
the new EC's proposals. While France traditionally -- especially under
President Macron -- has a more positive attitude towards central
industrial policy and European investments, Germany is opposed to this.
But now that the [German
economy](https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2024/10/11/het-duitse-businessmodel-is-in-groot-gevaar-a4869033)
and [automotive
industry](https://nos.nl/artikel/2538287-nog-geen-concrete-maatregelen-na-overleg-auto-industrie-en-duitse-overheid)
are in very difficult times, and Chancellor Scholz has announced a [new
industrial
policy](https://nieuws.nl/economie/scholz-nieuw-beleid-nodig-om-duitse-industrie-te-helpen),
things could change. There are similarities with 2020, when the EC
launched the EU recovery fund during the corona crisis, and France and
Germany suddenly turned out to be supporters, to the great surprise of
the Netherlands.

"Europe will be built through crises," predicted Jean Monet, one of the
founders of the EU. This proves true time and again. And Draghi knows
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Read this article in Dutch:** [Hoe Draghi de nieuwe Europese Commissie
stuurt](https://vector.tno.nl/artikelen/draghi-nieuwe-europese-commissie-stuurt/)
(in Dutch)
