**ASML vs Nokia: What Can the Netherlands Learn from the Nokia Effect?**

Investments in R&D are crucial for achieving a resilient economy and
society. However, [the Netherlands struggles to meet its ambitions
regarding R&D
expenditures](https://vector.tno.nl/en/articles/netherlands-what-lessons-can-we-learn/).
In fact, the results of [the recently updated TW
Top-30](https://vector.tno.nl/en/articles/top-30-companies-investing-most/)
show that R&D expenditures in the Netherlands are concentrated among a
limited group of companies, with a very dominant position for ASML and
the machinery sector. ASML has thus acquired an important [control
point](https://repository.tno.nl/SingleDoc?find=UID%204dc9c58d-a624-469e-a229-428c4d62d60a)
in the Dutch innovation landscape.

Such concentration of R&D expenditures brings both opportunities and
risks. Companies with high R&D investments are beneficial for the
economy, business activity, productivity, and the international position
of the countries where they are located. The risks of a narrow
concentration of R&D investments arise when such companies or sectors
encounter difficulties or cannot adapt to market changes. For example,
what happens if the market for chip machines and high-tech equipment is
severely disrupted - for instance, by geopolitical influences?

This is a potentially realistic scenario, as evidenced by European
innovation history. A prime example of a high R&D-intensive company in a
specific sector that encountered problems with significant consequences
is Nokia in the ICT sector in Finland. The rise of Nokia in Finland in
the 1990s, but also the downfall of the same company in the 2010s, had a
major impact on the Finnish economy and society. Although the
Netherlands is a different country, and ASML is a very different company
in a different sector than Nokia and currently not facing a downward
market dynamic, the Nokia case does provide insights into the
consequences of too much dependence on one company and sector for the
national economy and innovation landscape. ASML, too, remains sensitive
to technological changes, geopolitical tensions, and market disruptions.
The central question I pose in this piece is therefore: What lessons can
the Netherlands learn from Finland\'s experiences?

**ASML\'s Control Point**

In the Netherlands, ASML develops a unique and economically valuable
business activity within the semiconductor industry, giving the company
a control point. The technological complexity and high costs of
developing machines create significant entry barriers for competitors,
giving ASML a unique and influential position within the semiconductor
industry.

This power position is reinforced by the strong dependence of leading
chip manufacturers, who rely on ASML\'s machines for their chips.
Geopolitically, ASML\'s machines are also crucial for other states to
meet their public interests.

**Changes in Finland\'s Innovation Landscape**

From a historical perspective, the dynamics of Finland\'s R&D and
innovation landscape are interesting, as they are characterized by the
rise and fall of a specific sector and a company that dominated the
innovation landscape: the ICT sector with Nokia.

Nokia is one of Finland\'s largest and most influential technology
companies and was the world leader in mobile phones for a long time.
During its heyday, the company significantly contributed to Finland\'s
GDP and was a driving force behind Finland\'s technological and economic
progress. The company invested heavily in research and development
(R&D), significantly contributing to Finland\'s total R&D expenditures.
Much of the technological expertise Nokia developed was passed on to
other Finnish companies, strongly influencing the broader innovation
ecosystem. However, Nokia\'s dominant market position was undermined
around 2010 by the rise of other companies like Apple and Samsung, which
introduced new operating systems linked to smartphones. [This led not
only to massive layoffs and factory closures but also to a reduction in
R&D
expenditures](https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/targeting-r-d-intensity-in-finnish-innovation-policy_51c767c9-en.html).

The influence of the ICT sector and Nokia creates an interesting dynamic
in Finland\'s R&D and innovation landscape. This dynamic begins in the
1990s, during Nokia\'s rise in Finland, leading to a growing share of
the ICT sector in R&D expenditures. By the 2000s, the ICT sector
accounted for 27% of all R&D expenditures in Finland. Under Nokia\'s
success, this share steadily grew until the ICT sector\'s share of R&D
expenditures peaked at around 40% around 2010. Thus, Nokia and the ICT
sector dominated Finland\'s R&D innovation landscape. When the rise of
other tech companies undermined Nokia\'s dominant market position, it
resulted in a historic deep dive in R&D investments, and the ICT
sector\'s share of R&D investments fell back to around 20% (2018).
Additionally, a growing gap emerged between Finland\'s goal of spending
4% of GDP on R&D and the actual percentage of R&D investments, [which
even fell below the 3% R&D
target](https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/targeting-r-d-intensity-in-finnish-innovation-policy_51c767c9-en.html)
(2019). To date, Finland has not been able to achieve the intended R&D
target of at least 3% again.

The rise and fall of Nokia has thus become the prime example when
warning of the dangers and vulnerabilities of a country regarding such
economic dependence on a company or sector with a control point.

**Changes in the Netherlands\' Innovation Landscape**

This historical perspective on the dynamics of Finland\'s R&D and
innovation landscape takes on a different meaning when compared to the
current dynamics in the Netherlands\' R&D and innovation landscape.

The influence of ASML and the machinery sector creates an interesting
dynamic in the Netherlands\' R&D and innovation landscape. This dynamic
begins around 2016, when ASML\'s rise in the Netherlands takes off. This
has led to a growing share of ASML in R&D expenditures: [from
approximately 744 million to 2.8 billion euros in
2023](https://vector.tno.nl/en/articles/top-30-companies-investing-most/).
Notably, in recent years, the Dutch innovation landscape has changed and
is now characterized by a strong concentration of innovative companies
in North Brabant, particularly in the Eindhoven region. The Netherlands
now has one dominant sector linked to ASML and the innovation ecosystem
around it: the machinery industry. Thus, ASML and the machinery sector
currently dominate the Netherlands\' R&D innovation landscape.

A related vulnerability in the Netherlands\' R&D and innovation
landscape is the structural gap between the 3% R&D target that the
Netherlands sets for itself and the achieved percentage of R&D
investments in the Netherlands: on average, this percentage has remained
around 2.1% over the mentioned period (2016-2023) - despite the enormous
rise in R&D investments by ASML and the ecosystem around it. Thus, ASML
not only dominates expenditures; a significant dependence has also
emerged, which increases every year. This dependence in the Dutch
innovation landscape makes the Netherlands\' innovation position very
vulnerable.

**Discussion ASML vs Nokia: What Can the Netherlands Learn from the
Nokia Effect?**

The rise and fall of Nokia can serve as a warning for the Netherlands,
particularly regarding the vulnerabilities of a country that becomes
increasingly dependent on a company or sector with a control point.
Compared to Finland and Nokia, it can be said that the Netherlands is
vulnerable in terms of innovation due to the dominant position of ASML
and the linked machinery sector: the base is narrow and creates
significant dependence. If ASML were to disappear, the Netherlands -
like Finland in the 2010s - would suddenly become less innovative, the
machinery sector would also face problems due to the interconnectedness
of the innovation ecosystem, and the Netherlands risks losing its global
position in innovation. Although the Netherlands and ASML are a
different country and sector, with a different dynamic, the Nokia case
does provide insights that can also be relevant for the Netherlands.

**Implications for Dutch Innovation Policy**

How can the Netherlands incorporate the implications of the Nokia case
into shaping its innovation policy?

An important lesson from Finland\'s innovation history is the importance
of diversification in the innovation landscape. When looking at other
(EU) countries that do achieve the 3% target, it appears that they often
have not one but at least two leading R&D-intensive sectors. The R&D top
30 list provides guidelines for building other, potentially future
R&D-intensive sectors around, for example, pharma/biotech (Johnson &
Johnson) or digital platforms (Booking.com). By investing in such
sectors and providing opportunities for new players with potential
future control points, such as R&D-intensive SMEs, startups, and
scale-ups, an important step can be taken towards a resilient Dutch
innovation system.

To build future control points, it is also often useful to build on
activities where the Netherlands already has a specialty, such as with
ASML in the semiconductor industry. From such specialties,
diversification can be made to other industries and sectors [by
leveraging already accumulated, complex
knowledge](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1144581). In this
way, a current control point can be the driver for new players with
potential future control points. The Nokia case confirms that this
potential exists; the loss of Nokia in Finland also led to an [increase
in startups and a shift of talent to other sectors and
domains](https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/targeting-r-d-intensity-in-finnish-innovation-policy_51c767c9-en.html).

Another implication from Finland\'s innovation history is the importance
of focusing innovation policy on maintaining and strengthening current
control points. To maintain a control point like ASML\'s, it is, for
example, interesting to keep the business and investment climate in the
Netherlands favorable, as is happening through the recent \'[Project
Beethoven\'](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2024/04/02/bijlage-d-brief-asml-def).
Additionally, investments can be made to strengthen the broader
innovation ecosystem around ASML through (regional) innovation and
ecosystem policies. It is also good to provide space for spin-offs and
other ways to prevent lock-ins of a company.

**Conclusion**

With such directions for innovation policy, the economic resilience of
the Netherlands can be strengthened. It is good to keep in mind that the
above suggestions are based on the experiences of Nokia and the ICT
sector in Finland; of course, there are also other initiatives and
directions possible that can stimulate the growth of R&D and innovation
in the Netherlands. By exploring those possibilities as well, new
insights can emerge that can help strengthen the Netherlands\'
innovation power.
